# FAF on Linux

A set of scripts to automatically set up Supreme Commander: Forged Alliance with [Forged Alliance Forever](https://faforever.com/) on Linux. Tested on some places.

## Important notice

faf-linux has been updated to use the Steam Runtime. This will simplify installation and should eliminate a large class of strange bugs caused by distro differences.

Some recent versions of Ubuntu break sandboxing by default. If you see the error message `FATAL: bwrap missing or nonfunctional`, you will need to run `echo "kernel.apparmor_restrict_unprivileged_userns = 0" | sudo tee /etc/sysctl.d/99-allow-userns.conf` and then reboot.

## Setup instructions

1. Install prerequisites from your distribution's package manager:
   - Debian and derivatives (including Ubuntu, Pop!\_OS, and Linux Mint):
     - Ensure `i386` architecture is enabled: `sudo dpkg --add-architecture i386`
     - `sudo apt install git curl jq bubblewrap libvulkan1:amd64 libvulkan1:i386`
     - Nvidia drivers: make sure to have `libnvidia-gl-xxx:i386` (where X is the major version returned by `nvidia-smi`) installed.
   - Fedora and Red Hat-based (including Bazzite and Nobara):
     - `sudo dnf install git curl jq bubblewrap vulkan-loader.x86_64 vulkan-loader.i686`
   - Arch Linux and derivatives (including Manjaro, EndeavourOS, and CachyOS):
     - If you haven't enabled `multilib` in `pacman` yet, go to edit file `/etc/pacman.conf` and make sure the following are uncommented (including header):
         ```
         [multilib]
         Include = /etc/pacman.d/mirrorlist
         ```
         And then upgrade the system `sudo pacman -Syu`
     - `sudo pacman -Syu git curl jq bubblewrap vulkan-icd-loader lib32-vulkan-icd-loader`
   - Gentoo Linux:
      - Add following to `/etc/portage/package.use/faforever` (or whatever file you want in that folder):
        ```
        media-libs/vulkan-loader abi_x86_32
        ```
      - `sudo emerge -avuND @world`
      - `sudo emerge -a dev-vcs/git net-misc/curl app-misc/jq sys-apps/bubblewrap media-libs/vulkan-loader` (feel free to exclude any ebuilds that is already present in your system, no need to rebuild)
   - NixOS and other Nix-based environments:
     - Ensure graphics drivers are installed
     - In your Nix configuration, add the following, then rebuild:
       ```nix
       programs.steam = {
         enable = true;
         package = with pkgs; steam.override { extraPkgs = pkgs: [
           jq
           curl
           git
         ];};
       };
       ```
     - Run `steam-run bash` to start a shell in the configured FHS environment
     - Proceed with the rest of the installation steps below. All scripts, including `./run`, will need to be executed within this environment.
     - The desktop file generated by `install-shortcut.sh` will need to be edited to include the command above
     - In the future, the scripts should seamlessly support a Nix environment
     - Please see <https://github.com/FAForever/faf-linux/issues/38> for more information
   - Other distributions:
     - Commands needed: `git`, `curl`, `jq`, `bwrap`
     - Libraries needed:
       - Both 32-bit and 64-bit versions of:
         - `libvulkan.so.1` (Vulkan ICD loader)
   - **Note:** 32-bit graphics drivers are required. If using Intel or AMD, install the 32-bit version of `mesa-vulkan-drivers`. On Fedora, this is `mesa-vulkan-drivers.i686`. On Debian, this is `mesa-vulkan-drivers:i386`. On Arch, this is `lib32-vulkan-DRIVERNAME`, where DRIVERNAME is `radeon` or `intel`. If using Nvidia, ensure you have the 32-bit driver package installed. These should already be installed, although they may be missing if you have installed Steam within Flatpak.
1. Install Steam, then install Supreme Commander: Forged Alliance from Steam
   - If you want to play Forged Alliance on Steam, set `PROTON_NO_ESYNC=1 PROTON_NO_FSYNC=1 %command%` in launch options. If you only wish to play on FAF, this step is not necessary.
   - If you are using the game from GOG, skip this step
1. Clone this repository
   - Open a terminal where the installation should be located, then run `git clone https://github.com/FAForever/faf-linux`
   - This will create a new folder named faf-linux, where the client will be installed.
   - Do *not* put `faf-linux` within the game directory or any other Steam-managed directories. It will not function properly.
1. Run `./setup.sh` to set up the local wine prefix, the FAF client, java, and others
   - Note: the script will install everything into the path where you cloned this repository. If you wish to move the installation later, re-run `./set-client-paths.sh` and `./install-shortcut.sh`.
   - Note: if you bought the game from GOG and installed it with Lutris, you need to run the setup like this: `BYPASS_STEAM=1 GAME_PATH="/path/to/Lutris/gog/supreme-commander-forged-alliance/drive_c/GOG Games/Supreme Commander Forged Alliance" ./setup.sh`
   - Note: if you are using Ubuntu, you may see the error message `FATAL: bwrap missing or nonfunctional`. Ubuntu disallows applications to use sandboxing/containerization features (user namespaces) unless explicitly whitelisted. To fix this, run `echo "kernel.apparmor_restrict_unprivileged_userns = 0" | sudo tee /etc/sysctl.d/99-allow-userns.conf` and then reboot. Additionally, consider not using Ubuntu.
1. Start the FAF client with `./run` and log in
1. After logging in, close the FAF client and run `./set-client-paths.sh`
1. To launch FAF, run `./run`
1. If you wish to launch FAF without using the terminal, run `./install-shortcut.sh`. FAF will show up as "Forged Alliance Forever" in your application launcher.

## How to update after installation

1. Run `./update.sh perform` to update necessary components automatically.
1. You may safely delete old versions after update completes. The script will not currently automatically remove old versions.

## Manually updating individual components

The script `./update-component.sh` is provided for convenient updating of certain parts. Generally you do not need to use this.

- To update dxvk, run `./update-component.sh dxvk <new version>`. Versions look like "1.9.3".
- To update the FAF client, run `./update-component.sh faf-client <new version>`. Versions look like "2021.10.0".
- To update java, run `./update-component.sh java "<java url>"`.
  - The FAF client (at time of writing) wants Java 25.
  - Java URL is currently <https://github.com/adoptium/temurin25-binaries/releases/download/jdk-25.0.3%2B9/OpenJDK25U-jdk_x64_linux_hotspot_25.0.3_9.tar.gz>
  - These may change in the future. Check the `versions` file for current working URLs.

## Help, it doesn't work!

Please check the section below for common troubleshooting steps. Failing that, please ping `@iczero` on the [FAF Discord guild](https://discord.com/invite/hgvj6Af) in the `tech-support-forum` channel.

## Weird issues and other nonsense

- Black screen immediately after launching the game: follow the steps below to enable the virtual desktop.
  - This only seems to happen on Nvidia GPUs.
- Forged Alliance minimizes itself on Alt-Tab: run `./launchwrapper winecfg`, go to "Graphics", then check the "Emulate a virtual desktop" box.
  - ~~Warning: as of 2022-10-24, this *does* cause everything to break. You have been warned.~~ This is no longer the case.
  - To run the game in fullscreen with the virtual desktop, set the virtual desktop resolution to your monitor's resolution.
  - Gamescope is an alternative, see below
- FPS is horrendously low / UI lags several seconds: `ForgedAlliance.exe` might not be using your GPU. Make sure you have 32-bit support for your GPU drivers installed. Refer to the Ubuntu section on how to do this for Nvidia drivers.
  - Debug info for Nvidia drivers: : Run `watch -n 1 nvidia-smi` before starting the FAF client and a game. Once you start a game, `nvidia-smi` should list `...o/.faforever/bin/ForgedAlliance.exe` as one of the process names. If it does not, your FAF game is not using your GPU. You may not have 32-bit support installed for your GPU drivers. If you have 32-bit support, then `ls -lah {/etc,/usr/share}/vulkan/icd.d/` should list an `nvidia_icd.i686.json`.
- Mouse cursor stuck, can't click things in lobby: quit out of the game and the FAF client, run `./run-offline`, click past the intro videos until you get to the main menu, exit the game, then try starting a game from FAF again
- Game crashes with "Unable to create Direct3D", logs have wine error "Application requires child window rendering": libXcomposite is missing or failed to initialize, try installing `libxcomposite` or `libXcomposite` from package manager (the 32-bit version as well)
  - This should no longer happen. Please visit the support channel.
- FAF client crashes on launch with massively enormous error message, at the bottom it says something along the lines of "cannot use an unresolved DNS server address": Chances are there's something in your `/etc/resolv.conf` that netty does not understand (for example, scoped IPv6 addresses). Install `systemd-resolved` if possible.
- If you encounter strange display issues, consider using gamescope. In `common-env`, set `use_gamescope="1"` (or add that line if it does not already exist). Gamescope does not support the Nvidia driver.
- Mod selector in client doesn't work: this has been fixed by a recent commit, however it only takes effect on new installations. To fix the problem without a reinstall, find `game_data_path` in `common-env`, then replace `Local Settings/Application Data` with `AppData/Local`.
- Failed to create vulkan instance
  - May appear as:
    - `0024:err:vulkan:__wine_create_vk_instance_with_callback Failed to create instance`
    - `0024:err:vulkan:wine_vk_instance_load_physical_devices Failed to enumerate physical devices, res=-3`
    - `terminate called after throwing an instance of 'dxvk::DxvkError'`
  - Possible issues:
    - Vulkan drivers are not installed. Please install the appropriate Vulkan drivers for your GPU and distribution and install them.
    - 32-bit graphics drivers (including Vulkan libraries) are not installed. Please ensure both 32-bit and 64-bit graphics drivers, including Vulkan support, are installed.
    - You are on Arch and have accidentally installed `lib32-amdvlk`. AMDVLK is the old AMD Vulkan driver and causes many issues. Unless you are sure you need AMDVLK, uninstall `lib32-amdvlk`, and if necessary, install `lib32-vulkan-radeon` (newer AMD RADV driver) in its place.
- No adapters found
  - May appear as:
    - `Skipping Vulkan 1.2 adapter`
    - `DXVK: No adapters found.`
    - "Requested display count exceeds those available."
  - Your graphics driver lacks support for features required by the installed dxvk version. Please update your graphics drivers if possible.
  - If updating graphics drivers is not an option, manually downgrade dxvk (`./update-component.sh dxvk 1.10.3`) then add the line `dxvk_pin_version="1"` at the bottom of `common-env` to prevent the updater script from reverting to a newer version of dxvk.
- `setup.sh` hangs on the `wineboot` step
  - This should no longer happen. Please visit the support channel.
- Some errors related to missing effects or missing maps
  - May be caused by the client failing to update game files
  - Try deleting `~/.faforever` (create backup first if necessary)
  - Proceed from step 6 of the guide (start client, log in, close client, run `./set-client-paths.sh`)
- If you want to play Forged Alliance on Steam, set `PROTON_NO_ESYNC=1 PROTON_NO_FSYNC=1 %command%` in launch options. If you only wish to play on FAF, this step is not necessary.

## Why should you use this

- Years of my own suffering have culminated in this massive pile of hacks
- I suck at faf so I literally spend more time maintaining these scripts than playing faf
- I stole a bunch of open source stuff from Steam that makes the game run better (thanks Valve)
